Add documentation for HBO (#22065)
prestodb/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/optimizer/history-based-optimization.rst

joinNodeStatistics              Include total number of input rows and number of rows with NULL join key for both probe and build input         RandomizeNullKeyInOuterJoin
tableWriterNodeStatistics       Number of tasks in table writer                                                                                 ScaledWriterRule
partialAggregationStatistics    Row count and size of input and output of the partial aggregation node                                          PushPartialAggregationThroughExchange
=============================== =============================================================================================================== ===========================================================================================================

How to use HBO
--------------

Presto supports using historical statistics in query optimization. In HBO, statistics of the current query are stored and can be used to optimize future queries.

> The Redis HBO Provider can be used as storage for the historical statistics. HBO is controlled by the following session properties:

Reviewer: Nit: can be used as a plugin to enable storage/retrieval

> The Redis HBO Provider can be used as storage for the historical statistics. HBO is controlled by the following session properties:

Reviewer: Nit: If we could add a link to the page of Redis HBO Provider docs

===========================
History based optimizations
===========================

> What is HBO

Reviewer 2: question mark

------------

> HBO is a framework which enables recording statistics of a query to reuse the statistics for future queries with similar plans. To match queries with similar plans, a query plan

Reviewer 2: which enables recording --> which records
reuse the statistics --> reuse

> HBO is a framework which enables recording statistics of a query to reuse the statistics for future queries with similar plans. To match queries with similar plans, a query plan

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HBO is a framework which enables recording of a query's statistics to reuse those statistics for future queries with similar plans. To match queries with similar plans, a query plan
```

> is canonicalized so as to get rid of unrelated differences between plans (for example naming of intermediate variables in a plan), and each plan node is hashed to a string value.

Reviewer 2: comma after for example

> Historical statistics associated with the same hash value are used in HBO. HBO statistics is preferred over estimations from cost model, and optimizer falls back to cost based

Reviewer 2: is preferred --> are preferred

> Historical statistics associated with the same hash value are used in HBO. HBO statistics is preferred over estimations from cost model, and optimizer falls back to cost based

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Historical statistics associated with the same hash value are used in HBO. HBO statistics are preferred over estimations from cost models. The optimizer falls back to cost based
```

statistics when history statistics are not available.

> The statistics recorded for HBO are in `PlanStatistics` structs, which includes:

Reviewer 2: includes -> include

=============================== =============================================================================================================== ===========================================================================================================
Field                           Description                                                                                                     Optimizers
=============================== =============================================================================================================== ===========================================================================================================

> rowCount                        Number of rows output by a plan node                                                                            DetermineJoinDistributionType, DetermineSemiJoinDistributionType, PushPartialAggregationThroughExchange

Reviewer 3: You could remove the commas after the three optimizers here and in the following line - the formatting of the three names separates them well enough.

outputSize                      Size of output by a plan node                                                                                   DetermineJoinDistributionType, DetermineSemiJoinDistributionType, PushPartialAggregationThroughExchange
joinNodeStatistics              Include total number of input rows and number of rows with NULL join key for both probe and build input         RandomizeNullKeyInOuterJoin
tableWriterNodeStatistics       Number of tasks in table writer                                                                                 ScaledWriterRule
partialAggregationStatistics    Row count and size of input and output of the partial aggregation node                                          PushPartialAggregationThroughExchange
=============================== =============================================================================================================== ===========================================================================================================

> How to use HBO?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
How to use HBO
```
This doesn't need to be a question

---------------

> Presto supports using historical statistics in query optimization. In HBO, statistics of current query are stored and can be used in optimizations of future queries.

Reviewer 2: delete "using"
the current query

> Presto supports using historical statistics in query optimization. In HBO, statistics of current query are stored and can be used in optimizations of future queries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Presto supports using historical statistics in query optimization. In HBO, statistics of the current query are stored and can be used to optimize future queries.
```

=========================================================== =========================================================================================================================================================================================================== ===============
use_history_based_plan_statistics                           Enable using historical statistics for query optimization                                                                                                                                                   False
track_history_based_plan_statistics                         Enable recording the statistics of the current query as history statistics so as to be used by future queries                                                                                               False
history_based_optimizer_timeout_limit                       Timeout for history based optimizer                                                                                                                                                                         10 seconds

> restrict_history_based_optimization_to_complex_query        Enable history based optimization only for complex queries, i.e. queries with join and aggregation      True

Reviewer 3: Please fix the formatting for the default value `True`. See screenshot of local build.
<img width="969" alt="Screenshot 2024-03-04 at 10 06 41 AM" src="https://github.com/prestodb/presto/assets/7013443/64e5cb3b-c40a-4918-9787-c04d867711f4">

history_input_table_statistics_matching_threshold           When the size difference between current table and history table exceed this threshold, do not match history statistics. When value is 0, use the default value set by hbo.history-matching-threshold       0
=========================================================== =========================================================================================================================================================================================================== ===============

> Examples of HBO

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Example
```

> ---------------

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-------
```

             - Project[PlanNodeId 392][projectLocality = LOCAL] => [orderpriority:varchar(15), count:bigint]                                                          >
                     Estimates: {source: HistoryBasedSourceInfo, rows: 5 (117B), cpu: ?, memory: ?, network: ?}                                                       >
                 - Aggregate(FINAL)[orderpriority][$hashvalue][PlanNodeId 4] => [orderpriority:varchar(15), $hashvalue:bigint, count:bigint]                          >
                         Estimates: {source: HistoryBasedSourceInfo, rows: 5 (117B), cpu: ?, memory: ?, network: ?}                                                   >
                         count := "presto.default.count"((count_8)) (1:50)                                                                                            >
                     - LocalExchange[PlanNodeId 354][HASH][$hashvalue] (orderpriority) => [orderpriority:varchar(15), count_8:bigint, $hashvalue:bigint]              >
                         - RemoteSource[2] => [orderpriority:varchar(15), count_8:bigint, $hashvalue_9:bigint]

    
Optimizations using HBO
-----------------------

> DetermineJoinDistributionType & DetermineSemiJoinDistributionType

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
DetermineJoinDistributionType and DetermineSemiJoinDistributionType
```
Avoid Latin abbreviations. For context, see the [recommended word list entry for &](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/development/documentation/styleguide/word_list.html#) in the [Gitlab Documentation Style Guide](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/development/documentation/styleguide/).

> -----------------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-------------------------------------------------------------------
```
As a separate suggestion for you to consider, it feels as though these headings could be indented within the higher-level heading `Optimizations using HBO`. The [Sections](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/basics.html#sections) topic of the ReStructured Text Primer suggests that you could change the 

`------` formatting to `^^^^^^` to nest these headings within `Optimizations using HBO`. 

I took screenshots of the change before and after - the headings in the main text column are not affected, but you can see the difference in the Contents in the right column. 
<img width="309" alt="Screenshot 2024-03-04 at 10 10 52 AM" src="https://github.com/prestodb/presto/assets/7013443/cb1dd2b1-7126-4403-93fb-e5bb537d1b6a">
<img width="310" alt="Screenshot 2024-03-04 at 10 21 00 AM" src="https://github.com/prestodb/presto/assets/7013443/d2a850a0-0dcc-400f-983c-9c31f6723048">

> These two optimizations decide whether to do broadcast or repartition for a join. They use the size of the probe and build input in optimization.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These two optimizations decide whether to do broadcast or repartition for a join. They use the size of the probe and build input in optimization.

```
Need a line after this text for the two items in the unordered list to build correctly.

* Data size recorded from history queries will be used when HBO is enabled.
* Statistics from cost models are used when HBO statistics are not available or HBO is disabled.

ReorderJoins
------------

> This optimization reorders the join order based on the size of input and output. Data size recorded from history queries will be used when HBO is enabled.

Reviewer 2: the join order --> joins

PushPartialAggregationThroughExchange
-------------------------------------

> This optimization decides whether to split an aggregation into partial and final aggregations. HBO has special session properties to control it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This optimization decides whether to split an aggregation into partial and final aggregations. 

```
Need a line after this text for the two items in the unordered list to build correctly.

* Set `track_partial_aggregation_history` to true to track the output size of the partial aggregation node.
* Set `use_partial_aggregation_history` to true to use the partial aggregation node statistics to decide whether to split aggregation. The track of partial aggregation statistics
targets the pattern we found in production queries, where the final aggregation node is cardinality reducing but partial aggregation is not.

> When `use_partial_aggregation_history` is not enabled or partial aggregation statistics are not available, it will fall back to using the final aggregation statistics.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When `use_partial_aggregation_history` is not enabled or partial aggregation statistics are not available, it will fall back to using the final aggregation statistics.

```
The screenshot in my suggestion for line 77 shows the absence of the edit suggested here.

Note: When the optimizer disables partial aggregation, there are no statistics about partial aggregation and the partial aggregation statistics are unavailable.

ScaledWriterRule
----------------

> Scaled writer supports dynamically increasing the number of file write tasks, so as to avoid writing out too many small files. By default it starts with one write task.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The scaled writer rule supports dynamically increasing the number of file write tasks to avoid writing out too many small files. The default value is one write task.
```

In HBO, the number of tasks used for writing files is recorded as history. ScaledWriterRule decides the number of tasks to start with based on this information.

> It will start with half of the number of write tasks recorded in HBO , because scaled writer only increases the number of write tasks and it will never decrease if we use

Reviewer 2: remove space before comma

exactly the same number of tasks from history runs. This optimization can be enabled by session property `enable_history_based_scaled_writer`.

RandomizeNullKeyInOuterJoin
---------------------------
RandomizeNullKeyInOuterJoin is used to mitigate skew of NULL values in outer joins by rewriting NULL keys to non null keys which will never match.

> It benefits queries with outer join where the join key has skew on NULL values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It benefits queries with outer joins where the join key has skew on NULL values.
```

In HBO, the number of NULL keys and total join keys are tracked for join nodes; this optimization will be enabled when the portion of NULL keys exceeds the following thresholds:

> .

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```
Need a line after this text for the two items in the unordered list to build correctly.

* The number of NULL keys, which is hardcoded to 100,000.

> * The portion of NULL keys, which can be set by session property `randomize_outer_join_null_key_null_ratio_threshold` and defaults to 2%.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The portion of NULL keys, which can be set by session property `randomize_outer_join_null_key_null_ratio_threshold` and defaults to 2%.

```
